<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML//EN" "xhtml-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- CONVEX # converter_version:6.7.1 # generated_on:20160615-0814 -->
<head>
   <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
   <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"
         href="http://publications.europa.eu/resource/presentation-style-sheet/oj/oj.css"/>
   <title>C_2016202EN.01002201.xml</title>
</head>
<body>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="60%"/>
      <col width="20%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-date">7.6.2016   </p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-lg">EN</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-ti">Official Journal of the European Union</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-oj">C 202/22</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="separator"/>
   <p id="d1e33-22-1" class="ti-art">Article 14</p>
   <p class="normal">1.   The European Parliament shall, jointly with the Council, exercise legislative and budgetary functions. It shall exercise functions of political control and consultation as laid down in the Treaties. It shall elect the President of the Commission.</p>
   <p class="normal">2.   The European Parliament shall be composed of representatives of the Union's citizens. They shall not exceed seven hundred and fifty in number, plus the President. Representation of citizens shall be degressively proportional, with a minimum threshold of six members per Member State. No Member State shall be allocated more than ninety-six seats.</p>
   <p class="normal">The European Council shall adopt by unanimity, on the initiative of the European Parliament and with its consent, a decision establishing the composition of the European Parliament, respecting the principles referred to in the first subparagraph.</p>
   <p class="normal">3.   The members of the European Parliament shall be elected for a term of five years by direct universal suffrage in a free and secret ballot.</p>
   <p class="normal">4.   The European Parliament shall elect its President and its officers from among its members.</p>
   <hr class="doc-end"/>
</body>
</html>
