<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML//EN" "xhtml-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- CONVEX # converter_version:6.7.1 # generated_on:20160615-0843 -->
<head>
   <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
   <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"
         href="http://publications.europa.eu/resource/presentation-style-sheet/oj/oj.css"/>
   <title>C_2016202EN.01028401.xml</title>
</head>
<body>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="60%"/>
      <col width="20%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-date">   </p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-lg">EN</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-ti">Official Journal of the European Union</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-oj">C 202/284</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="separator"/>
   <p class="doc-ti" id="d1e32-284-1">PROTOCOL (No 15)</p>
   <p class="doc-ti">ON CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND</p>
   <p class="normal">THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,</p>
   <p class="normal">RECOGNISING that the United Kingdom shall not be obliged or committed to adopt the euro without a separate decision to do so by its government and parliament,</p>
   <p class="normal">GIVEN that on 16 October 1996 and 30 October 1997 the United Kingdom government notified the Council of its intention not to participate in the third stage of economic and monetary union,</p>
   <p class="normal">NOTING the practice of the government of the United Kingdom to fund its borrowing requirement by the sale of debt to the private sector,</p>
   <p class="normal">HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union:</p>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">1.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">Unless the United Kingdom notifies the Council that it intends to adopt the euro, it shall be under no obligation to do so.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">2.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">In view of the notice given to the Council by the United Kingdom government on 16 October 1996 and 30 October 1997, paragraphs 3 to 8 and 10 shall apply to the United Kingdom.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">3.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">The United Kingdom shall retain its powers in the field of monetary policy according to national law.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">4.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">Articles 119, second paragraph, 126(1), (9) and (11), 127(1) to (5), 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 138, 140(3), 219, 282(2), with the exception of the first and last sentences thereof, 282(5), and 283 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union shall not apply to the United Kingdom. The same applies to Article 121(2) of this Treaty as regards the adoption of the parts of the broad economic policy guidelines which concern the euro area generally. In these provisions references to the Union or the Member States shall not include the United Kingdom and references to national central banks shall not include the Bank of England.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">5.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">The United Kingdom shall endeavour to avoid an excessive government deficit.</p>
               <p class="normal">Articles 143 and 144 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union shall continue to apply to the United Kingdom. Articles 134(4) and 142 shall apply to the United Kingdom as if it had a derogation.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">6.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">The voting rights of the United Kingdom shall be suspended in respect of acts of the Council referred to in the Articles listed in paragraph 4 and in the instances referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 139(4) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. For this purpose the second subparagraph of Article 139(4) of the Treaty shall apply.</p>
               <p class="normal">The United Kingdom shall also have no right to participate in the appointment of the President, the Vice-President and the other members of the Executive Board of the ECB under the second subparagraph of Article 283(2) of the said Treaty.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">7.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">Articles 3, 4, 6, 7, 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 11.2, 12.1, 14, 16, 18 to 20, 22, 23, 26, 27, 30 to 34 and 49 of the Protocol on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ("the Statute") shall not apply to the United Kingdom.</p>
               <p class="normal">In those Articles, references to the Union or the Member States shall not include the United Kingdom and references to national central banks or shareholders shall not include the Bank of England.</p>
               <p class="normal">References in Articles 10.3 and 30.2 of the Statute to "subscribed capital of the ECB" shall not include capital subscribed by the Bank of England.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">8.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">Article 141(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and Articles 43 to 47 of the Statute shall have effect, whether or not there is any Member State with a derogation, subject to the following amendments:</p>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(a)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">References in Article 43 to the tasks of the ECB and the EMI shall include those tasks that still need to be performed in the third stage owing to any decision of the United Kingdom not to adopt the euro.</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(b)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">In addition to the tasks referred to in Article 46, the ECB shall also give advice in relation to and contribute to the preparation of any decision of the Council with regard to the United Kingdom taken in accordance with paragraphs 9(a) and 9(c).</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(c)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">The Bank of England shall pay up its subscription to the capital of the ECB as a contribution to its operational costs on the same basis as national central banks of Member States with a derogation.</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">9.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">The United Kingdom may notify the Council at any time of its intention to adopt the euro. In that event:</p>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(a)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">The United Kingdom shall have the right to adopt the euro provided only that it satisfies the necessary conditions. The Council, acting at the request of the United Kingdom and under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 140(1) and (2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, shall decide whether it fulfils the necessary conditions.</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(b)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">The Bank of England shall pay up its subscribed capital, transfer to the ECB foreign reserve assets and contribute to its reserves on the same basis as the national central bank of a Member State whose derogation has been abrogated.</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
               <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
                  <col width="4%"/>
                  <col width="96%"/>
                  <tbody>
                     <tr>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">(c)</p>
                        </td>
                        <td valign="top">
                           <p class="normal">The Council, acting under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 140(3) of the said Treaty, shall take all other necessary decisions to enable the United Kingdom to adopt the euro.</p>
                        </td>
                     </tr>
                  </tbody>
               </table>
               <p class="normal">If the United Kingdom adopts the euro pursuant to the provisions of this Protocol, paragraphs 3 to 8 shall cease to have effect.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="4%"/>
      <col width="96%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">10.</p>
            </td>
            <td valign="top">
               <p class="normal">Notwithstanding Article 123 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and Article 21.1 of the Statute, the Government of the United Kingdom may maintain its "ways and means" facility with the Bank of England if and so long as the United Kingdom does not adopt the euro.</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="doc-end"/>
</body>
</html>
