<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML//EN" "xhtml-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- CONVEX # converter_version:6.7.1 # generated_on:20160615-0836 -->
<head>
   <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
   <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"
         href="http://publications.europa.eu/resource/presentation-style-sheet/oj/oj.css"/>
   <title>C_2016202EN.01020301.xml</title>
</head>
<body>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="60%"/>
      <col width="20%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-date">   </p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-lg">EN</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-ti">Official Journal of the European Union</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-oj">C 202/203</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="separator"/>
   <p class="doc-ti" id="d1e32-203-1">PROTOCOL (No 1)</p>
   <p class="doc-ti">ON THE ROLE OF NATIONAL PARLIAMENTS IN THE EUROPEAN UNION</p>
   <p class="normal">THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,</p>
   <p class="normal">RECALLING that the way in which national Parliaments scrutinise their governments in relation to the activities of the Union is a matter for the particular constitutional organisation and practice of each Member State,</p>
   <p class="normal">DESIRING to encourage greater involvement of national Parliaments in the activities of the European Union and to enhance their ability to express their views on draft legislative acts of the Union as well as on other matters which may be of particular interest to them,</p>
   <p class="normal">HAVE AGREED UPON the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Treaty on European Union, to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community:</p>
   <p id="d1e51-203-1" class="ti-section-1">TITLE I</p>
   <p id="C_2016202EN.01020301-d-001" class="ti-section-2">
      <span class="bold">INFORMATION FOR NATIONAL PARLIAMENTS</span>
   </p>
   <p id="d1e59-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 1</p>
   <p class="normal">Commission consultation documents (green and white papers and communications) shall be forwarded directly by the Commission to national Parliaments upon publication. The Commission shall also forward the annual legislative programme as well as any other instrument of legislative planning or policy to national Parliaments, at the same time as to the European Parliament and the Council.</p>
   <p id="d1e64-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 2</p>
   <p class="normal">Draft legislative acts sent to the European Parliament and to the Council shall be forwarded to national Parliaments.</p>
   <p class="normal">For the purposes of this Protocol, "draft legislative acts" shall mean proposals from the Commission, initiatives from a group of Member States, initiatives from the European Parliament, requests from the Court of Justice, recommendations from the European Central Bank and requests from the European Investment Bank, for the adoption of a legislative act.</p>
   <p class="normal">Draft legislative acts originating from the Commission shall be forwarded to national Parliaments directly by the Commission, at the same time as to the European Parliament and the Council.</p>
   <p class="normal">Draft legislative acts originating from the European Parliament shall be forwarded to national Parliaments directly by the European Parliament.</p>
   <p class="normal">Draft legislative acts originating from a group of Member States, the Court of Justice, the European Central Bank or the European Investment Bank shall be forwarded to national Parliaments by the Council.</p>
   <p id="d1e77-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 3</p>
   <p class="normal">National Parliaments may send to the Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission a reasoned opinion on whether a draft legislative act complies with the principle of subsidiarity, in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.</p>
   <p class="normal">If the draft legislative act originates from a group of Member States, the President of the Council shall forward the reasoned opinion or opinions to the governments of those Member States.</p>
   <p class="normal">If the draft legislative act originates from the Court of Justice, the European Central Bank or the European Investment Bank, the President of the Council shall forward the reasoned opinion or opinions to the institution or body concerned.</p>
   <p id="d1e86-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 4</p>
   <p class="normal">An eight-week period shall elapse between a draft legislative act being made available to national Parliaments in the official languages of the Union and the date when it is placed on a provisional agenda for the Council for its adoption or for adoption of a position under a legislative procedure. Exceptions shall be possible in cases of urgency, the reasons for which shall be stated in the act or position of the Council. Save in urgent cases for which due reasons have been given, no agreement may be reached on a draft legislative act during those eight weeks. Save in urgent cases for which due reasons have been given, a ten-day period shall elapse between the placing of a draft legislative act on the provisional agenda for the Council and the adoption of a position.</p>
   <p id="d1e91-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 5</p>
   <p class="normal">The agendas for and the outcome of meetings of the Council, including the minutes of meetings where the Council is deliberating on draft legislative acts, shall be forwarded directly to national Parliaments, at the same time as to Member States' governments.</p>
   <p id="d1e96-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 6</p>
   <p class="normal">When the European Council intends to make use of the first or second subparagraphs of Article 48(7) of the Treaty on European Union, national Parliaments shall be informed of the initiative of the European Council at least six months before any decision is adopted.</p>
   <p id="d1e101-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 7</p>
   <p class="normal">The Court of Auditors shall forward its annual report to national Parliaments, for information, at the same time as to the European Parliament and to the Council.</p>
   <p id="d1e106-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 8</p>
   <p class="normal">Where the national Parliamentary system is not unicameral, Articles 1 to 7 shall apply to the component chambers.</p>
   <p id="d1e112-203-1" class="ti-section-1">TITLE II</p>
   <p id="C_2016202EN.01020301-d-002" class="ti-section-2">
      <span class="bold">INTERPARLIAMENTARY COOPERATION</span>
   </p>
   <p id="d1e120-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 9</p>
   <p class="normal">The European Parliament and national Parliaments shall together determine the organisation and promotion of effective and regular interparliamentary cooperation within the Union.</p>
   <p id="d1e125-203-1" class="ti-art">Article 10</p>
   <p class="normal">A conference of Parliamentary Committees for Union Affairs may submit any contribution it deems appropriate for the attention of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission. That conference shall in addition promote the exchange of information and best practice between national Parliaments and the European Parliament, including their special committees. It may also organise interparliamentary conferences on specific topics, in particular to debate matters of common foreign and security policy, including common security and defence policy. Contributions from the conference shall not bind national Parliaments and shall not prejudge their positions.</p>
   <hr class="doc-end"/>
</body>
</html>
