<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML//EN" "xhtml-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- CONVEX # converter_version:6.7.1 # generated_on:20160615-0851 -->
<head>
   <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
   <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"
         href="http://publications.europa.eu/resource/presentation-style-sheet/oj/oj.css"/>
   <title>C_2016202EN.01031401.xml</title>
</head>
<body>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="60%"/>
      <col width="20%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-date">   </p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-lg">EN</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-ti">Official Journal of the European Union</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-oj">C 202/314</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="separator"/>
   <p class="doc-ti" id="d1e32-314-1">PROTOCOL (No 31)</p>
   <p class="doc-ti">CONCERNING IMPORTS INTO THE EUROPEAN UNION OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS REFINED IN THE NETHERLANDS ANTILLES</p>
   <p class="normal">THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,</p>
   <p class="normal">BEING DESIROUS of giving fuller details about the system of trade applicable to imports into the European Union of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles,</p>
   <p class="normal">HAVE AGREED UPON the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union:</p>
   <p id="d1e48-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 1</p>
   <p class="normal">This Protocol is applicable to petroleum products coming under the Brussels Nomenclature numbers 27.10, 27.11, 27.12, ex 27.13 (paraffin wax, petroleum or shale wax and paraffin residues) and 27.14, imported for use in Member States.</p>
   <p id="d1e53-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 2</p>
   <p class="normal">Member States shall undertake to grant to petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles the tariff preferences resulting from the association of the latter with the Union, under the conditions provided for in this Protocol. These provisions shall hold good whatever may be the rules of origin applied by the Member States.</p>
   <p id="d1e58-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 3</p>
   <p class="normal">1.   When the Commission, at the request of a Member State or on its own initiative, establishes that imports into the Union of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles under the system provided for in Article 2 above are giving rise to real difficulties on the market of one or more Member States, it shall decide that customs duties on the said imports shall be introduced, increased or re-introduced by the Member States in question, to such an extent and for such a period as may be necessary to meet that situation. The rates of the customs duties thus introduced, increased or re-introduced may not exceed the customs duties applicable to third countries for these same products.</p>
   <p class="normal">2.   The provisions of paragraph 1 can in any case be applied when imports into the Union of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles reach two million metric tons a year.</p>
   <p class="normal">3.   The Council shall be informed of decisions taken by the Commission in pursuance of paragraphs 1 and 2, including those directed at rejecting the request of a Member State. The Council shall, at the request of any Member State, assume responsibility for the matter and may at any time amend or revoke them.</p>
   <p id="d1e76-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 4</p>
   <p class="normal">1.   If a Member State considers that imports of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles, made either directly or through another Member State under the system provided for in Article 2 above, are giving rise to real difficulties on its market and that immediate action is necessary to meet them, it may on its own initiative decide to apply customs duties to such imports, the rate of which may not exceed those of the customs duties applicable to third countries in respect of the same products. It shall notify its decision to the Commission which shall decide within one month whether the measures taken by the State should be maintained or must be amended or cancelled. The provisions of Article 3(3) shall be applicable to such decision of the Commission.</p>
   <p class="normal">2.   When the quantities of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles imported either directly or through another Member State, under the system provided for in Article 2 above, into a Member State or States of the European Union exceed during a calendar year the tonnage shown in the Annex to this Protocol, the measures taken in pursuance of paragraph 1 by that or those Member States for the current year shall be considered to be justified; the Commission shall, after assuring itself that the tonnage fixed has been reached, formally record the measures taken. In such a case the other Member States shall abstain from formally placing the matter before the Council.</p>
   <p id="d1e89-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 5</p>
   <p class="normal">If the Union decides to apply quantitative restrictions to petroleum products, no matter whence they are imported, these restrictions may also be applied to imports of such products from the Netherlands Antilles. In such a case preferential treatment shall be granted to the Netherlands Antilles as compared with third countries.</p>
   <p id="d1e94-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 6</p>
   <p class="normal">1.   The provisions of Articles 2 to 5 shall be reviewed by the Council, by unanimous decision, after consulting the European Parliament and the Commission, when a common definition of origin for petroleum products from third countries and associated countries is adopted, or when decisions are taken within the framework of a common commercial policy for the products in question or when a common energy policy is established.</p>
   <p class="normal">2.   When such revision is made, however, equivalent preferences must in any case be maintained in favour of the Netherlands Antilles in a suitable form and for a minimum quantity of 21½ million metric tons of petroleum products.</p>
   <p class="normal">3.   The Union's commitments in regard to equivalent preferences as mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article may, if necessary, be broken down country by country taking into account the tonnage indicated in the Annex to this Protocol.</p>
   <p id="d1e112-314-1" class="ti-art">Article 7</p>
   <p class="normal">For the implementation of this Protocol, the Commission is responsible for following the pattern of imports into the Member States of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles. Member States shall communicate to the Commission, which shall see that it is circulated, all useful information to that end in accordance with the administrative conditions recommended by it.</p>
   <hr class="doc-sep"/>
   <div id="C_2016202EN.01031602">
      <p class="doc-ti" id="d1e32-316-2">ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL</p>
      <p class="normal">For the implementation of Article 4(2) of the Protocol concerning imports into the European Union of petroleum products refined in the Netherlands Antilles, the High Contracting Parties have decided that the quantity of 2 million metric tons of petroleum products from the Antilles shall be allocated among the Member States as follows:</p>
      <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" class="table">
         <col width="55%"/>
         <col width="45%"/>
         <tbody>
            <tr class="table">
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-txt">Germany …</p>
               </td>
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-num">625 000  metric tons</p>
               </td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="table">
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-txt">Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union …</p>
               </td>
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-num">200 000  metric tons</p>
               </td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="table">
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-txt">France …</p>
               </td>
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-num">75 000  metric tons</p>
               </td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="table">
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-txt">Italy …</p>
               </td>
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-num">100 000  metric tons</p>
               </td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="table">
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-txt">Netherlands …</p>
               </td>
               <td valign="top" class="table">
                  <p class="tbl-num">1 000 000  metric tons</p>
               </td>
            </tr>
         </tbody>
      </table>
   </div>
   <hr class="doc-end"/>
</body>
</html>
