<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML//EN" "xhtml-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- CONVEX # converter_version:6.7.1 # generated_on:20160629-0737 -->
<head>
   <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
   <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"
         href="http://publications.europa.eu/resource/presentation-style-sheet/oj/oj.css"/>
   <title>C_2016202EN.01039301.xml</title>
</head>
<body>
   <table width="100%" border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="10%"/>
      <col width="60%"/>
      <col width="20%"/>
      <tbody>
         <tr>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-date">7.6.2016   </p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-lg">EN</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-ti">Official Journal of the European Union</p>
            </td>
            <td>
               <p class="hd-oj">C 202/393</p>
            </td>
         </tr>
      </tbody>
   </table>
   <hr class="separator"/>
   <p class="normal">The peoples of Europe, in creating an ever closer union among them, are resolved to share a peaceful future based on common values.</p>
   <p class="normal">Conscious of its spiritual and moral heritage, the Union is founded on the indivisible, universal values of human dignity, freedom, equality and solidarity; it is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law. It places the individual at the heart of its activities, by establishing the citizenship of the Union and by creating an area of freedom, security and justice.</p>
   <p class="normal">The Union contributes to the preservation and to the development of these common values while respecting the diversity of the cultures and traditions of the peoples of Europe as well as the national identities of the Member States and the organisation of their public authorities at national, regional and local levels; it seeks to promote balanced and sustainable development and ensures free movement of persons, services, goods and capital, and the freedom of establishment.</p>
   <p class="normal">To this end, it is necessary to strengthen the protection of fundamental rights in the light of changes in society, social progress and scientific and technological developments by making those rights more visible in a Charter.</p>
   <p class="normal">This Charter reaffirms, with due regard for the powers and tasks of the Union and for the principle of subsidiarity, the rights as they result, in particular, from the constitutional traditions and international obligations common to the Member States, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Social Charters adopted by the Union and by the Council of Europe and the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union and of the European Court of Human Rights. In this context the Charter will be interpreted by the courts of the Union and the Member States with due regard to the explanations prepared under the authority of the Praesidium of the Convention which drafted the Charter and updated under the responsibility of the Praesidium of the European Convention.</p>
   <p class="normal">Enjoyment of these rights entails responsibilities and duties with regard to other persons, to the human community and to future generations.</p>
   <p class="normal">The Union therefore recognises the rights, freedoms and principles set out hereafter.</p>
   <hr class="doc-end"/>
</body>
</html>
